# SAM (1975, Cullingford)

## Script

A script is knowledge of a stereotyped event that occurs in a socially ritualized activity such as going to a restaurant and riding a subway

A script contains the main pattern of a situation.

* A script consists of episodes. an episode is a causal chain
* episodes are connected at "turning points" (decisions)
* A script has roles (people) and props (things).
* A script has preconditions
* An active script defines a context of
    * a list of patterns which predicts what inputs will be seen at a given point in a story
    * a binding list which links the tokens for PPs produced by PP-memory which script variables
    * a record of the script-scenes which are currently active
    * a list of scriptal interferences -- events which have happened which interfere with the normal flow of activity in the script -- which are currently outstanding
    * a script-global "strength" indicator which SAM uses to flag how strongly it "believes" in its inference
* A PP of a certain class fills a slot.
* A **setting** is a place where something happens (class = locale).
* A **link** connects settings.
* Events form a causal chain.
* Scripts can have variants, called **tracks**.
* A script has internal routes called **episodes**. Episodes may be cyclic.
* The importance of an episode is signified by its **pathvalue** (default, nominal, interference).
* The **header** of a script is a condition that decides if a script is instantiated.
* Kinds of script:
    * Situational: institutionalized public situations: eating in a restaurant, riding on the subway (SAM uses mainly these)
    * Personal: a way to achieve an ideosyncratic goal: getting a date with a pretty girl
    * Instrumental: rigid action chains with a single main actor: starting a car, stroking a tennis ball, preparing coq au vin

## Modules

* Analyzer
* PP-Memory
* Script applier

### Analyzer

Uses ELI (English Language Interpreter) as a parser / CD former

### PP-Memory

resolves references to PP's (people and things)

### Script applier

Story understanding is a process of constructing a "trace" or "scenario" through a given script which contains both the events explicitly mentioned in the story and those which can be inferred to have happened.

The script applier tries to find the matching script and then makes inferences to fill in the gaps

* filling in a causal chain
* reference specification (ie pronouns)
* use the time/place setting to determine where and how long things happen
* delayed inferences

The script applier also solves references.

## Conceptual nominals

Things:

* actors
* persons
* groups
* organizations
* polities
* forces
* physical objects
    * simple objects
    * structured objects
* places
    * simple locales
    * geographical features
    * links
* miscellaneous

## Papers

* SAM - a story understander - Schank (1975)
* An approach to the representation of mundane world knowledge: the generation and management of situational scripts - Cullingford (1975)
* The application of script-based knowledge in a integrated story-understanding system - Cullingford (1976)
* The uses of world-knowledge in text-understanding - Cullingford (1976)
* Delayed interpretation using processing notes - Riesbeck (1977) (on the ELI, English Language Interpreter, parser used by SAM)
* Script application: computer understanding of newspaper stories (PhD thesis) - Cullingford (1978)
