# SAM (1975, Cullingford)

## Modules

* Analyzer
* PP-Memory
* Script applier

### Script applier

A script contains the main pattern of a situation.

* A script has roles and props (things).
* A PP of a certain class fills a slot.
* A **setting** is a place where something happens (class = locale).
* A **link** connects settings.
* Events form a causal chain.
* Scripts can have variants, called **tracks**.
* A script has internal routes called **episodes**. Episodes may be cyclic.
* The importance of an episode is signified by its **pathvalue** (default, nominal, interference).
* The **header** of a script is a condition that decides if a script is instantiated.
* Kinds of script:
    * Situational: institutionalized public situations: eating in a restaurant, riding on the subway (SAM uses mainly these)
    * Personal: a way to achieve an ideosyncratic goal: getting a date with a pretty girl
    * Instrumental: rigid action chains with a single main actor: starting a car, stroking a tennis ball, preparing coq au vin


## Papers

* An approach to the representation of mundane world knowledge: the generation and management of situational scripts - Cullingford (1975)
* The application of script-based knowledge in a integrated story-understanding system - Cullingford (1976)
* The uses of world-knowledge in text-understanding - Cullingford (1976)
* Delayed interpretation using processing notes - Riesbeck (1977) (on the ELI, English Language Interpreter, parser used by SAM)
* Script application: computer understanding of newspaper stories (PhD thesis) - Cullingford (1978)
