PAM (Plan Applier Mechanism) is a program that understands stories by analyzing the intentions of the story's characters, and relating their intentions to their actions. PAM reads in sentences in English, produces Conceptual Dependency (CD) meaning representations for them, and connects together Lhese CD's to form a
story representation.

While scripts can be used to understand very familiar situations, plans are needed to understand novel ones.

## Request

In addition to having this knowledge of plans, goals, and themes, an understander must have some way of applying its knowledge to an understanding task. PAM applies its knowledge through the use of requests. A request is an "expectation" coupled together with an action to be taken if the expectation is met. 

## Plan

The plan starts with a main goal. This goal depends on sub-goals: I-goals (instrumental) and D-goals (delta). 

* I goal: I-PREP, I-COOK (a realization of I-PREP)
* D goal: D-PROX, D-KNOW, D-CONTROL
* Planbox: ASK, OVERPOWER, THREATEN, BARGAIN, INGEST. A planbox has preconditions and a result.

A named plan is a fixed sequence of instrumental goals that form the usual path to the attainment of a goal. Example:

    USE(X) = D-KNOW(LOC(X)) + D-PROX(X) + D-CONT(X) + I-PREP(X) + DO

## Main loop

PAM's control structure had a main loop that reacted to each input sentence by classifying it as either a goal or an action. For every action, PAM would try to find a plan it could be part of, such that that plan could be explained as arising from a known goal.


## Understanding

The story can contain a goal explicitly, or the understander infers the goal. Then the understander decomposes this goal into sub-goals. The means to achieve a goal is called a plan-box.

At any point in reading a story PAM has a list of predicted plan-boxes. If a new sentence fits a plan box, it is said to be understood.


## Papers

* Recognizing plans summarizing actions - Schmidt et al (1976)
* Using plans to understand natural language - Wilensky (1976)
* PAM - a program that infers intentions - Wilensky (1977)
* Understanding Goal-Based Stories (PhD thesis) - Wilensky (1978)
* Memory and inference - Wilensky (1983)
